(upbeat music)
In this lecture, you'll learn about
the OSPF metric, which is the cost.
As OSPF is a Link State routing protocol,
the router will learn
about all the destinations in it's area,
the links to get there and their costs.
The router will select routes based on the lowest cost
to get to the destination
and that's the route that will make it into the routing table.
In a multiple area OSPF network,
ABRs know the information for each area
that they are connected to,
so that will normally be two areas.
'Area 0' (the backbone)
and also the normal area that they're connected to.
When multiple areas are in use,
each router has individual routes for each IP subnet
in its own area and also summary routes to other areas
which go via the ABR.
For destinations in its own area,
a router looks at all available links
that it can use to get there,
and then it will choose the path
with the lowest overall cost.
For destinations in a different area,
a router looks at all available links to get to the ABR
and chooses the path with the lowest overall cost
to the ABR.
It's then up to the ABR to choose
the best path onwards from there.
The SPF, Shortest Path First algorithm
calculates the overall cost for each available path
to each destination network
and then selects the lowest cost path.
And the overall cost is the cumulative cost
of all outgoing interfaces.
So, the algorithm that OSPF uses to choose the best path
when multiple paths are available, it's very simple.
It just looks at the cost
in all of the different outgoing interfaces
that it can use to get there and whichever path
has got the lowest overall cumulative cost
is the one that's going to be preferred.
Now, you should ensure that the cost is set the same
on the interfaces on both sides of the link,
or you can get asymmetric routing.
Let's have a look at an example of that.
So in the example here,
we're going to look at the 10.1.2 network on the left
and sending traffic over to the 10.0.1 network
on the right, and also return traffic
coming back in the other direction.
So for traffic going from left to right,
to the 10.0.1 network,
R4 can either send out traffic along the top path
via routers R3, R2, and then R1,
or it can send it along the bottom path
via router R5 and then R1.
And R4 knows about all those different links,
it knows about the cost of the links as well.
It will add up the cost along the top path,
it will also add up the cost along the bottom path,
whichever path has got the lowest overall cost
is going to be the path which is used.
And when it's looking at those costs,
it's the cost on the outgoing interface
that it is going to use.
So for traffic going along the top path,
the outbound interfaces would be FastEthernet 0/0 on R4,
and then FastEthernet 1/0 on R3,
and then Fast 0/0 on R2,
and finally the connected interface
which is Fast 1/0 on R1.
Obviously along the bottom path,
it's also going to calculate the cost that it would be
if it used that path,
which is outbound interface Fast 2/0 on R4,
and then 3/0 on R5, and then 1/0 on R1.
For traffic coming back in the other direction,
if a host like a PC on the 10.0.1 network
sends traffic with a destination address of 10.1.2,
that traffic is going to come into R1,
and then R1 needs to select either the top
or the bottom path to send the traffic out of,
whichever one has got the lowest cost.
For traffic going along the top path,
the outbound interface is Fast 0/0 on R1,
and then 1/0 on R2, and then 0/0 on R3,
and finally 1/0 on R4.
Obviously the bottom path, the outbound interfaces
would be 3/0 on R1, 2/0 on R5, and finally 1/0 on R4.
So notice that the outbound interface
is on the other side of the link,
depending on which direction the traffic is going in.
So, for traffic going from left to right,
it's going to go out Fast 0/0.
On that same link for traffic coming back
the other way from R1, it's on Fast 0/0 on R3.
Now, we pretty much always want traffic
to go along the same path in both directions
between any two points on our network.
So to ensure that, if you set the cost of a link,
make sure that you set it on both interfaces.
If you've got a different cost
on different sides of your links,
then traffic can end up taking different paths
in different directions.
By default, the cost will be the same
on both sides of the link, but if you change anything,
make sure you do the same thing on both sides of the link.
So having a look at an example
of an OSPF metric calculation,
R2 over on the left has got two possible paths it could take
to get to the 10.0.1.0/24 network behind R1.
It could either go over the single link directly to R1,
or it could go via R3.
If it goes over directly the link to R1,
the cost would be 50 (the cost to R1) plus 10,
(the cost of the link itself), so that cost would be 60.
To go along the bottom path via R3,
the cost would be 10 plus 10 plus 10.
So the cost there would be 30.
So the bottom path has got a lower cost,
even though it's a longer hop count,
it's a lower cost because it's better quality links,
we're going to have higher bandwidth,
so it's going to prefer to take the lower path.
Next thing to talk about is the reference bandwidth.
The cost for OSPF is automatically derived
from the interface bandwidth.
So a higher bandwidth interface
will be automatically preferred.
The way that the cost is calculated
is it's the reference bandwidth
divided by the actual interface bandwidth.
And the default reference bandwidth
is 100 megabits per second.
So what this means is if you've got a FastEthernet link,
that would default to a cost of one.
Because FastEthernet, the default bandwidth on there is 100
for 100 megabits per second.
We divide 100 by 100, that gives us a cost of one.
On a serial interface, like a T1 in the example here,
the bandwidth there is 1.544 megabits per second.
So that will default to a cost of 64
because 100 divided by 1.544 is 64.
So you can see that the higher bandwidth interface
is going to be automatically preferred.
But there's a problem here.
Because OSPF will treat all interfaces
of 100 megabits per second or faster as equal,
the best possible cost is one.
We don't have like a 0.1 cost.
So FastEthernet, Gigabit Ethernet, and 10 Gigabit Ethernet,
et cetera, 40 Gigabit Ethernet, 100 Gigabit Ethernet,
they will all default to a cost of one
and this can cause undesirable routing in modern networks
with modern high speed ethernet interfaces.
You see the example in the diagram here.
The link directly between R1 and R2
on the top path is FastEthernet.
So with the default reference bandwidth of 100,
it gets a cost of one.
But on the bottom path going via R3,
they're Gigabit Ethernet interfaces,
so they're faster, they've got higher bandwidth,
but because we've got the default
reference bandwidth of 100,
they get a cost of one each as well.
So the top path will have a default cost of two,
which is the cost from R2 to R1,
plus the cost of the link itself.
And then along the bottom path,
it's going to have a cost of three.
So the bottom path is not going to be preferred.
The router is going to use the top path,
which is FastEthernet even though it's slower
than the bottom path which has Gigabit Ethernet.
So really we would prefer the traffic
to go along the bottom path.
So the way that we can force this
is by changing the reference bandwidth.
The reason that the default reference bandwidth
is 100 by the way, is that OSPF has been around
for a long time.
And when OSPF first came out,
we were back when ethernet networks
used old-style classical ethernet of 10 megabits per second.
And at the time, network engineers thought,
"Well, maybe sometime in the future,
we'll have 100 megabits per second.
Well, but that's way off, we'll never get faster than that,"
Obviously times have moved on,
and we do have much faster ethernet interfaces
than FastEthernet of 100 megabits per second now.
We've got Gigabit Ethernet, we've got 10 Gigabit Ethernet,
and we've even got 40 gigabit and 100 Gigabit Ethernet now.
But using the old default reference bandwidth,
they'll all be treated the same equal cost by OSPF.
So we want to set the reference bandwidth
to a higher value.
The way you do that is at global config, router OSPF,
and then under there the command
is auto-cost reference-bandwidth
and what you want to set the reference bandwidth to.
So if you set it to 1000, for example,
that would mean that Gigabit Ethernet interfaces
will have a cost of one, FastEthernet will get a cost of 10.
But you want to think a bit further ahead in the future.
If on your current production network,
your fastest interfaces right now are Gigabit Ethernet,
don't set a reference bandwidth of 1000
because maybe in a year or two's time,
you're going to have 10 gigabit, 40 Gigabit Ethernet,
and 100 Gigabit Ethernet.
So set it to a high value that you're not going to have
to change it again in future.
And when you set the reference bandwidth,
you need to do it the same on all routers
so they're all using a consistent metric.
So the example here,
I've set auto-cost reference bandwidth 100,000,
which is 100 Gigabit Ethernet.
So now for our example,
the FastEthernet interface along the top path
will get a cost of 1000,
the Gigabit Ethernet interfaces along the bottom path,
get a cost of 100.
So it will now prefer the bottom path
because we changed the reference bandwidth.
So in real world networks,
typically all you'll have to do
is just change reference bandwidth,
and then OSPF is going to automatically select
the highest bandwidth paths,
which is what you would normally prefer.
However, you might want to manipulate this,
for example say you've got a high latency satellite link
which has higher bandwidth but you want to prefer
a lower bandwidth interface.
You can do that by manipulating the OSPF metric.
Another reason would be just if you want to spread
the load of your traffic across different paths
in your network.
So OSPF takes the bandwidth of an interface into account
when calculating the metric,
so paths along higher bandwidth links will be preferred.
The most desirable path will typically
be automatically selected like I just said.
But if you want to use a different path,
you can manipulate that by manually changing
the bandwidth or the OSPF cost on interfaces.
It's recommended to use cost
because the bandwidth setting can affect many features
other than OSPF, such as QoS.
With OSPF, we manipulate the cost rather than the bandwidth,
but both would have the same effect.
So if we are going to manipulate the bandwidth,
you see in the example here on R1
I've said show interface serial 1/0.
And I can see there that the bandwidth
is 1544 kilobits per second,
which is the default bandwidth on a serial interface.
If I wanted to change this,
in global config, I can go to interface serial 1/0
and then say bandwidth 768.
Again, at the physical level,
the link is still going to run at the clock rate.
So if the clock rate is 1544,
it's still going to run at 1544.
Setting the bandwidth does not change
the actual physical speed of the interface,
it just changes how IOS will look at that interface
for software policy.
So this is how we could manipulate the overall cost
for that link by changing the bandwidth.
But the better way of doing it is by directly changing
the cost because that wouldn't affect
other software policy like QoS.
To do that, we can say interface FastEthernet 0/0,
ip ospf cost 50,
will change the cost on that link.
And to verify what the cost on a link is
we can do a show ip ospf interface.
If you've got a lot of interfaces on the router
and you just say show ip ospf interface and hit enter,
you're going to get quite long output.
So you can also specify the individual interface here.
You'll just get information about that one interface.
We can also do a show ip ospf interface brief
to get it in a short output to see the cost
on all of our interfaces.
Okay, so that's all the information about the OSPF metric.
Next lecture, we'll take a look at actually configuring it
in the lab.